The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel;
To know wisdom and instruction; to comprehend the words of understanding;
To receive the discipline of wisdom, justice, and right, and equity;
To give prudence to the simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion;
That the wise man may hear, and increase in learning, and the man of understanding may attain unto wise counsels;
To understand a proverb, and a figure; the words of the wise, and their dark sayings.
The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge; but the foolish despise wisdom and discipline.
Hear, my son, the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the teaching of thy mother;
For they shall be a chaplet of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck.
My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.
If they say: 'Come with us,
Let us swallow them up alive as the grave, and whole, as those that go down into the pit;
We shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil;
Cast in thy lot among us; let us all have one purse'--
My son, walk not thou in the way with them, restrain thy foot from their path;
For their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed blood.
For in vain the net is spread in the eyes of any bird;
And these lie in wait for their own blood, they lurk for their own lives.
So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain; it taketh away the life of the owners thereof.
Wisdom crieth aloud in the streets, she uttereth her voice in the broad places;
She calleth at the head of the noisy streets, at the entrances of the gates, in the city, she uttereth her words:
'How long, ye thoughtless, will ye love thoughtlessness?
Turn you at my reproof; behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you.
Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man attended,
But ye have set at nought all my counsel, and would none of my reproof;
I also, in your calamity, will laugh, I will mock when your dread cometh;
When your dread cometh as a storm, and your calamity cometh on as a whirlwind;
Then will they call me, but I will not answer, they will seek me earnestly, but they shall not find me.
For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the LORD;
They would none of my counsel, they despised all my reproof.
Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices.
For the waywardness of the thoughtless shall slay them, and the confidence of fools shall destroy them.
But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell securely, and shall be quiet without fear of evil.'
My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and lay up my commandments with thee;
So that thou make thine ear attend unto wisdom, and thy heart incline to discernment;
Yea, if thou call for understanding, and lift up thy voice for discernment;
If thou seek her as silver, and search for her as for hid treasures;
Then shalt thou understand the fear of the LORD, and find the knowledge of God.
For the LORD giveth wisdom, out of His mouth cometh knowledge and discernment;
He layeth up sound wisdom for the upright, He is a shield to them that walk in integrity;
That He may guard the paths of justice, and preserve the way of His godly ones.
Then shalt thou understand righteousness and justice, and equity, yea, every good path.
For wisdom shall enter into thy heart, and knowledge shall be pleasant unto thy soul;
Discretion shall watch over thee, discernment shall guard thee;
To deliver thee from the way of evil, from the men that speak froward things;
Who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness;
Who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardness of evil;
Who are crooked in their ways, and perverse in their paths;
To deliver thee from the strange woman, even from the alien woman that maketh smooth her words;
That forsaketh the lord of her youth, and forgetteth the covenant of her God.
For her house sinketh down unto death, and her paths unto the shades;
None that go unto her return, neither do they attain unto the paths of life;
That thou mayest walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths of the righteous.
For the upright shall dwell in the land, and the whole-hearted shall remain in it.
But the wicked shall be cut off from the land, and the faithless shall be plucked up out of it.
My son, forget not my teaching; but let thy heart keep my commandments;
For length of days, and years of life, and peace, will they add to thee.
Let not kindness and truth forsake thee;
So shalt thou find grace and good favour in the sight of God and man.
Trust in the LORD with all thy heart, and lean not upon thine own understanding.
In all thy ways acknowledge Him, and He will direct thy paths.
Be not wise in thine own eyes; fear the LORD, and depart from evil;
It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.
Honour the LORD with thy substance, and with the first-fruits of all thine increase;
So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy vats shall overflow with new wine.
My son, despise not the chastening of the LORD, neither spurn thou His correction;
For whom the LORD loveth He correcteth,
Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that obtaineth understanding.
For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold.
She is more precious than rubies; and all the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her.
Length of days is in her right hand; in her left hand are riches and honour.
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.
She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and happy is every one that holdest her fast.
The LORD by wisdom founded the earth; by understanding He established the heavens.
By His knowledge the depths were broken up, and the skies drop down the dew.
My son, let not them depart from thine eyes; keep sound wisdom and discretion;
So shall they be life unto thy soul, and grace to thy neck.
Then shalt thou walk in thy way securely, and thou shalt not dash thy foot.
When thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid; yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.
Be not afraid of sudden terror, neither of the destruction of the wicked, when it cometh;
For the LORD will be thy confidence, and will keep thy foot from being caught.
Withhold not good from him to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy hand to do it.
Say not unto thy neighbour: 'Go, and come again, and to-morrow I will give'; when thou hast it by thee.
Devise not evil against thy neighbour, seeing he dwelleth securely by thee.
Strive not with a man without cause, if he have done thee no harm.
Envy thou not the man of violence, and choose none of his ways.
For the perverse is an abomination to the LORD; but His counsel is with the upright.
The curse of the LORD is in the house of the wicked; but He blesseth the habitation of the righteous.
If it concerneth the scorners, He scorneth them, but unto the humble He giveth grace.
The wise shall inherit honour; but as for the fools, they carry away shame.
Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, and attend to know understanding.
For I give you good doctrine; forsake ye not my teaching.
For I was a son unto my father, tender and an only one in the sight of my mother.
And he taught me, and said unto me: 'Let thy heart hold fast my words, keep my commandments, and live;
Get wisdom, get understanding; forget not, neither decline from the words of my mouth;
Forsake her not, and she will preserve thee; love her, and she will keep thee.
The beginning of wisdom is: Get wisdom; yea, with all thy getting get understanding.
Extol her, and she will exalt thee; she will bring thee to honour, when thou dost embrace her.
She will give to thy head a chaplet of grace; a crown of glory will she bestow on thee.'
Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings; and the years of thy life shall be many.
I have taught thee in the way of wisdom; I have led thee in paths of uprightness.
When thou goest, thy step shall not be straitened; and if thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble.
Take fast hold of instruction, let her not go; keep her, for she is thy life.
Enter not into the path of the wicked, and walk not in the way of evil men.
Avoid it, pass not by it; turn from it, and pass on.
For they sleep not, except they have done evil; and their sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall.
For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence.
But the path of the righteous is as the light of dawn, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day.
The way of the wicked is as darkness; they know not at what they stumble.
My son, attend to my words; incline thine ear unto my sayings.
Let them not depart from thine eyes; keep them in the midst of thy heart.
For they are life unto those that find them, and health to all their flesh.
Above all that thou guardest keep thy heart; for out of it are the issues of life.
Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee.
Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before thee.
Make plain the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established.
Turn not to the right hand nor to the left; remove thy foot from evil.
My son, attend unto my wisdom; incline thine ear to my understanding;
That thou mayest preserve discretion, and that thy lips may keep knowledge.
For the lips of a strange woman drop honey, and her mouth is smoother than oil;
But her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword.
Her feet go down to death; her steps take hold on the nether-world;
Lest she should walk the even path of life, her ways wander, but she knoweth it not.
Now therefore, O ye children, hearken unto me, and depart not from the words of my mouth.
Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house;
Lest thou give thy vigour unto others, and thy years unto the cruel;
Lest strangers be filled with thy strength, and thy labours be in the house of an alien;
And thou moan, when thine end cometh, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed,
And say: 'How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof;
Neither have I hearkened to the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me!
I was well nigh in all evil in the midst of the congregation and assembly.'
Drink waters out of thine own cistern, and running waters out of thine own well.
Let thy springs be dispersed abroad, and courses of water in the streets.
Let them be only thine own, and not strangers' with thee.
Let thy fountain be blessed; and have joy of the wife of thy youth.
A lovely hind and a graceful doe,
Why then wilt thou, my son, be ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of an alien?
For the ways of man are before the eyes of the LORD, and He maketh even all his paths.
His own iniquities shall ensnare the wicked, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sin.
He shall die for lack of instruction; and in the greatness of his folly he shall reel.
My son, if thou art become surety for thy neighbour, if thou hast struck thy hands for a stranger--
Thou art snared by the words of thy mouth, thou art caught by the words of thy mouth--
Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself, seeing thou art come into the hand of thy neighbour;
Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids.
Deliver thyself as a gazelle from the hand [of the hunter], and as a bird from the hand of the fowler.
Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise;
Which having no chief, overseer, or ruler,
Provideth her bread in the summer, and gatherest her food in the harvest.
How long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard? When wilt thou arise out of thy sleep?
'Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep'--
So shall thy poverty come as a runner, and thy want as an armed man.
A base person, a man of iniquity, is he that walketh with a froward mouth;
That winketh with his eyes, that scrapeth with his feet, that pointeth with his fingers;
Frowardness is in his heart, he deviseth evil continually; he soweth discord.
Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly; on a sudden shall he be broken, and that without remedy.
There are six things which the LORD hateth, yea, seven which are an abomination unto Him:
Haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood;
A heart that deviseth wicked thoughts, feet that are swift in running to evil;
A false witness that breatheth out lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren.
My son, keep the commandment of thy father, and forsake not the teaching of thy mother;
Bind them continually upon thy heart, tie them about thy neck.
When thou walkest, it shall lead thee, when thou liest down, it shall watch over thee; and when thou awakest, it shall talk with thee.
For the commandment is a lamp, and the teaching is light, and reproofs of instruction are the way of life;
To keep thee from the evil woman, from the smoothness of the alien tongue.
Lust not after her beauty in thy heart; neither let her captivate thee with her eyelids.
For on account of a harlot a man is brought to a loaf of bread, but the adulteress hunteth for the precious life.
Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned?
Or can one walk upon hot coals, and his feet not be scorched?
So he that goeth in to his neighbour's wife; whosoever toucheth her shall not go unpunished.
Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry;
But if he be found, he must restore sevenfold, he must give all the substance of his house.
He that committeth adultery with a woman lacketh understanding; he doeth it that would destroy his own soul.
Wounds and dishonour shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away.
For jealousy is the rage of a man, and he will not spare in the day of vengeance.
He will not regard any ransom; neither will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts.
My son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee.
Keep my commandments and live, and my teaching as the apple of thine eye.
Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thy heart.
Say unto wisdom: 'Thou art my sister', and call understanding thy kinswoman;
That they may keep thee from the strange woman, from the alien woman that maketh smooth her words.
For at the window of my house I looked forth through my lattice;
And I beheld among the thoughtless ones, I discerned among the youths, a young man void of understanding,
Passing through the street near her corner, and he went the way to her house;
In the twilight, in the evening of the day, in the blackness of night and the darkness.
And, behold, there met him a woman with the attire of a harlot, and wily of heart.
She is riotous and rebellious, her feet abide not in her house;
Now she is in the streets, now in the broad places, and lieth in wait at every corner.
So she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face she said unto him:
'Sacrifices of peace-offerings were due from me; this day have I paid my vows.
Therefore came I forth to meet thee, to seek thy face, and I have found thee.
I have decked my couch with coverlets, with striped cloths of the yarn of Egypt.
I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning; let us solace ourselves with loves.
For my husband is not at home, he is gone a long journey;
He hath taken the bag of money with him; he will come home at the full moon.'
With her much fair speech she causeth him to yield, with the blandishment of her lips she enticeth him away.
He goeth after her straightway, as an ox that goeth to the slaughter, or as one in fetters to the correction of the fool;
Till an arrow strike through his liver; as a bird hasteneth to the snare--
Now therefore, O ye children, hearken unto me, and attend to the words of my mouth.
Let not thy heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her paths.
For she hath cast down many wounded; yea, a mighty host are all her slain.
Her house is the way to the nether-world, going down to the chambers of death.
Doth not wisdom call, and understanding put forth her voice?
In the top of high places by the way, where the paths meet, she standeth;
Beside the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the doors, she crieth aloud:
'Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice is to the sons of men.
O ye thoughtless, understand prudence, and, ye fools, be ye of an understanding heart.
Hear, for I will speak excellent things, and the opening of my lips shall be right things.
For my mouth shall utter truth, and wickedness is an abomination to my lips.
All the words of my mouth are in righteousness, there is nothing perverse or crooked in them.
They are all plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge.
Receive my instruction, and not silver, and knowledge rather than choice gold.
For wisdom is better than rubies, and all things desirable are not to be compared unto her.
I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge of devices.
The fear of the LORD is to hate evil;
Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom; I am understanding, power is mine.
By me kings reign, and princes decree justice.
By me princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth.
I love them that love me, and those that seek me earnestly shall find me.
Riches and honour are with me; yea, enduring riches and righteousness.
My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold; and my produce than choice silver.
I walk in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of justice;
That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance, and that I may fill their treasuries.
The LORD made me as the beginning of His way, the first of His works of old.
I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was.
When there were no depths, I was brought forth; when there were no fountains abounding with water.
Before the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought forth;
While as yet He had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the beginning of the dust of the world.
When He established the heavens, I was there; when He set a circle upon the face of the deep,
When He made firm the skies above, when the fountains of the deep showed their might,
When He gave to the sea His decree, that the waters should not transgress His commandment, when He appointed the foundations of the earth;
Then I was by Him, as a nursling; and I was daily all delight, playing always before Him,
Playing in His habitable earth, and my delights are with the sons of men.
Now therefore, ye children, hearken unto me; for happy are they that keep my ways.
Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not.
Happy is the man that hearkeneth to me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.
For whoso findeth me findeth life, and obtaineth favour of the LORD.
But he that misseth me wrongeth his own soul; all they that hate me love death.'
Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven pillars;
She hath prepared her meat, she hath mingled her wine; she hath also furnished her table.
She hath sent forth her maidens, she calleth, upon the highest places of the city:
'Whoso is thoughtless, let him turn in hither'; as for him that lacketh understanding, she saith to him:
'Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled.
Forsake all thoughtlessness, and live; and walk in the way of understanding.
He that correcteth a scorner getteth to himself shame, and he that reproveth a wicked man, it becometh unto him a blot.
Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee; reprove a wise man, and he will love thee.
Give to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser; teach a righteous man, and he will increase in learning.
The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom, and the knowledge of the All-holy is understanding.
For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life shall be increased.
If thou art wise, thou art wise for thyself; and if thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it.'
The woman Folly is riotous; she is thoughtless, and knoweth nothing.
And she sitteth at the door of her house, on a seat in the high places of the city,
To call to them that pass by, who go right on their ways:
'Whoso is thoughtless, let him turn in hither'; and as for him that lacketh understanding, she saith to him:
'Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.'
But he knoweth not that the shades are there; that her guests are in the depths of the nether-world.

Treasures of wickedness profit nothing; but righteousness delivereth from death.
The LORD will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish; but He thrusteth away the desire of the wicked.
He becometh poor that dealeth with a slack hand; but the hand of the diligent maketh rich.
A wise son gathereth in summer; but a son that doeth shamefully sleepeth in harvest.
Blessings are upon the head of the righteous; but the mouth of the wicked concealeth violence.
The memory of the righteous shall be for a blessing; but the name of the wicked shall rot.
The wise in heart will receive commandments; but a prating fool shall fall.
He that walketh uprightly walketh securely; but he that perverteth his ways shall be found out.
He that winketh with the eye causeth sorrow; and a prating fool shall fall.
The mouth of the righteous is a fountain of life; but the mouth of the wicked concealeth violence.
Hatred stirreth up strifes; but love covereth all transgressions.
In the lips of him that hath discernment wisdom is found; but a rod is for the back of him that is void of understanding.
Wise men lay up knowledge; but the mouth of the foolish is an imminent ruin.
The rich man's wealth is his strong city; the ruin of the poor is their poverty.
The wages of the righteous is life; the increase of the wicked is sin.
He is in the way of life that heedeth instruction; but he that forsaketh reproof erreth.
He that hideth hatred is of lying lips; and he that uttereth a slander is a fool.
In the multitude of words there wanteth not transgression; but he that refraineth his lips is wise.
The tongue of the righteous is as choice silver; the heart of the wicked is little worth.
The lips of the righteous feed many; but the foolish die for want of understanding.
The blessing of the LORD, it maketh rich, and toil addeth nothing thereto.
It is as sport to a fool to do wickedness, and so is wisdom to a man of discernment.
The fear of the wicked, it shall come upon him; and the desire of the righteous shall be granted.
When the whirlwind passeth, the wicked is no more; but the righteous is an everlasting foundation.
As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is the sluggard to them that send him.
The fear of the LORD prolongeth days; but the years of the wicked shall be shortened.
The hope of the righteous is gladness; but the expectation of the wicked shall perish.
The way of the LORD is a stronghold to the upright, but ruin to the workers of iniquity.
The righteous shall never be moved; but the wicked shall not inhabit the land.
The mouth of the righteous buddeth with wisdom; but the froward tongue shall be cut off.
The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable; but the mouth of the wicked is all frowardness.
A false balance is an abomination to the LORD; but a perfect weight is His delight.
When pride cometh, then cometh shame; but with the lowly is wisdom.
The integrity of the upright shall guide them; but the perverseness of the faithless shall destroy them.
Riches profit not in the day of wrath; but righteousness delivereth from death.
The righteousness of the sincere shall make straight his way; but the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.
The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them; but the faithless shall be trapped in their own crafty device.
When a wicked man dieth, his expectation shall perish, and the hope of strength perisheth.
The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead.
With his mouth the impious man destroyeth his neighbour; but through knowledge shall the righteous be delivered.
When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoiceth; and when the wicked perish, there is joy.
By the blessing of the upright a city is exalted; but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.
He that despiseth his neighbour lacketh understanding; but a man of discernment holdeth his peace.
He that goeth about as a talebearer revealeth secrets; but he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth a matter.
Where no wise direction is, a people falleth; but in the multitude of counsellors there is safety.
He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it; but he that hateth them that strike hands is secure.
A gracious woman obtaineth honour; and strong men obtain riches.
The merciful man doeth good to his own soul; but he that is cruel troubleth his own flesh.
The wicked earneth deceitful wages; but he that soweth righteousness hath a sure reward.
Stedfast righteousness tendeth to life; but he that pursueth evil pursueth it to his own death.
They that are perverse in heart are an abomination to the LORD; but such as are upright in their way are His delight.
My hand upon it! the evil man shall not be unpunished; but the seed of the righteous shall escape.
As a ring of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman that turneth aside from discretion.
The desire of the righteous is only good; but the expectation of the wicked is wrath.
There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tendeth only to want.
The beneficent soul shall be made rich, and he that satisfieth abundantly shall be satisfied also himself.
He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him; but blessing shall be upon the head of him that selleth it.
He that diligently seeketh good seeketh favour; but he that searcheth for evil, it shall come unto him.
He that trusteth in his riches shall fall; but the righteous shall flourish as foliage.
He that troubleth his own house shall inherit the wind; and the foolish shall be servant to the wise of heart.
The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life; and he that is wise winneth souls.
Behold, the righteous shall be requited in the earth; how much more the wicked and the sinner!
Whoso loveth knowledge loveth correction; but he that is brutish hateth reproof.
A good man shall obtain favour of the LORD; but a man of wicked devices will He condemn.
A man shall not be established by wickedness; but the root of the righteous shall never be moved.
A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband; but she that doeth shamefully is as rottenness in his bones.
The thoughts of the righteous are right; but the counsels of the wicked are deceit.
The words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood; but the mouth of the upright shall deliver them.
The wicked are overthrown, and are not; but the house of the righteous shall stand.
A man shall be commended according to his intelligence; but he that is of a distorted understanding shall be despised.
Better is he that is lightly esteemed, and hath a servant, than he that playeth the man of rank, and lacketh bread.
A righteous man regardeth the life of his beast; but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.
He that tilleth his ground shall have plenty of bread; but he that followeth after vain things is void of understanding.
The wicked desireth the prey of evil men; but the root of the righteous yieldeth fruit.
In the transgression of the lips is a snare to the evil man; but the righteous cometh out of trouble.
A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth, and the doings of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him.
The way of a fool is straight in his own eyes; but he that is wise hearkeneth unto counsel.
A fool's vexation is presently known; but a prudent man concealeth shame.
He that breatheth forth truth uttereth righteousness; but a false witness deceit.
There is that speaketh like the piercings of a sword; but the tongue of the wise is health.
The lip of truth shall be established for ever; but a lying tongue is but for a moment.
Deceit is in the heart of them that devise evil; but to the counsellors of peace is joy.
There shall no mischief befall the righteous; but the wicked are filled with evil.
Lying lips are an abomination to the LORD; but they that deal truly are His delight.
A prudent man concealeth knowledge; but the heart of fools proclaimeth foolishness.
The hand of the diligent shall bear rule; but the slothful shall be under tribute.
Care in the heart of a man boweth it down; but a good word maketh it glad.
The righteous is guided by his friend; but the way of the wicked leadeth them astray.
The slothful man shall not hunt his prey; but the precious substance of men is to be diligent.
In the way of righteousness is life, and in the pathway thereof there is no death.
A wise son is instructed of his father; but a scorner heareth not rebuke.
A man shall eat good from the fruit of his mouth; but the desire of the faithless is violence.
He that guardeth his mouth keepeth his life; but for him that openeth wide his lips there shall be ruin.
The soul of the sluggard desireth, and hath nothing; but the soul of the diligent shall be abundantly gratified.
A righteous man hateth lying; but a wicked man behaveth vilely and shamefully.
Righteousness guardeth him that is upright in the way; but wickedness overthroweth the sinner.
There is that pretendeth himself rich, yet hath nothing; there is that pretendeth himself poor, yet hath great wealth.
The ransom of a man's life are his riches; but the poor heareth no threatening.
The light of the righteous rejoiceth; but the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.
By pride cometh only contention; but with the well-advised is wisdom.
Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished; but he that gathereth little by little shall increase.
Hope deferred maketh the heart sick; but desire fulfilled is a tree of life.
Whoso despiseth the word shall suffer thereby; but he that feareth the commandment shall be rewarded.
The teaching of the wise is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.
Good understanding giveth grace; but the way of the faithless is harsh.
Every prudent man dealeth with forethought; but a fool unfoldeth folly.
A wicked messenger falleth into evil; but a faithful ambassador is health.
Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuseth instruction; but he that regardeth reproof shall be honoured.
The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul; and it is an abomination to fools to depart from evil.
He that walketh with wise men shall be wise; but the companion of fools shall smart for it.
Evil pursueth sinners; but to the righteous good shall be repaid.
A good man leaveth an inheritance to his children's children; and the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the righteous.
Much food is in the tillage of the poor; but there is that is swept away by want of righteousness.
He that spareth his rod hateth his son; but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes.
The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his desire; but the belly of the wicked shall want.
Every wise woman buildeth her house; but the foolish plucketh it down with her hands.
He that walketh in his uprightness feareth the LORD; but he that is perverse in his ways despiseth Him.
In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride; but the lips of the wise shall preserve them.
Where no oxen are, the crib is clean; but much increase is by the strength of the ox.
A faithful witness will not lie; but a false witness breatheth forth lies.
A scorner seeketh wisdom, and findeth it not; but knowledge is easy unto him that hath discernment.
Go from the presence of a foolish man, for thou wilt not perceive the lips of knowledge.
The wisdom of the prudent is to look well to his way; but the folly of fools is deceit.
Amends pleadeth for fools; but among the upright there is good will.
The heart knoweth its own bitterness; and with its joy no stranger can intermeddle.
The house of the wicked shall be overthrown; but the tent of the upright shall flourish.
There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death.
Even in laughter the heart acheth; and the end of mirth is heaviness.
The dissembler in heart shall have his fill from his own ways; and a good man shall be satisfied from himself.
The thoughtless believeth every word; but the prudent man looketh well to his going.
A wise man feareth, and departeth from evil; but the fool behaveth overbearingly, and is confident.
He that is soon angry dealeth foolishly; and a man of wicked devices is hated.
The thoughtless come into possession of folly; but the prudent are crowned with knowledge.
The evil bow before the good, and the wicked at the gates of the righteous.
The poor is hated even of his own neighbour; but the rich hath many friends.
He that despiseth his neighbour sinneth; but he that is gracious unto the humble, happy is he.
Shall they not go astray that devise evil? But mercy and truth shall be for them that devise good.
In all labour there is profit; but the talk of the lips tendeth only to penury.
The crown of the wise is their riches; but the folly of fools remaineth folly.
A true witness delivereth souls; but he that breatheth forth lies is all deceit.
In the fear of the LORD a man hath strong confidence; and his children shall have a place of refuge.
The fear of the LORD is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.
In the multitude of people is the king's glory; but in the want of people is the ruin of the prince.
He that is slow to anger is of great understanding; but he that is hasty of spirit exalteth folly.
A tranquil heart is the life of the flesh; but envy is the rottenness of the bones.
He that oppresseth the poor blasphemeth his Maker; but he that is gracious unto the needy honoureth Him.
The wicked is thrust down in his misfortune; but the righteous, even when he is brought to death, hath hope.
In the heart of him that hath discernment wisdom resteth; but in the inward part of fools it maketh itself known.
Righteousness exalteth a nation; but sin is a reproach to any people.
The king's favour is toward a servant that dealeth wisely; but his wrath striketh him that dealeth shamefully.
A soft answer turneth away wrath; but a grievous word stirreth up anger.
The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright; but the mouth of fools poureth out foolishness.
The eyes of the LORD are in every place, keeping watch upon the evil and the good.
A soothing tongue is a tree of life; but perverseness therein is a wound to the spirit.
A fool despiseth his father's correction; but he that regardeth reproof is prudent.
In the house of the righteous is much treasure; but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble.
The lips of the wise disperse knowledge; but the heart of the foolish is not stedfast.
The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD; but the prayer of the upright is His delight.
The way of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD; but He loveth him that followeth after righteousness.
There is grievous correction for him that forsaketh the way; and he that hateth reproof shall die.
The nether-world and Destruction are before the LORD; how much more then the hearts of the children of men!
A scorner loveth not to be reproved; he will not go unto the wise.
A merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance; but by sorrow of heart the spirit is broken.
The heart of him that hath discernment seeketh knowledge; but the mouth of fools feedeth on folly.
All the days of the poor are evil; but he that is of a merry heart hath a continual feast.
Better is little with the fear of the LORD, than great treasure and turmoil therewith.
Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith.
A wrathful man stirreth up discord; but he that is slow to anger appeaseth strife.
The way of the sluggard is as though hedged by thorns; but the path of the upright is even.
A wise son maketh a glad father; but a foolish man despiseth his mother.
Folly is joy to him that lacketh understanding; but a man of discernment walketh straightforwards.
For want of counsel purposes are frustrated; but in the multitude of counsellors they are established.
A man hath joy in the answer of his mouth; and a word in due season, how good is it!
The path of life goeth upward for the wise, that he may depart from the nether-world beneath.
The LORD will pluck up the house of the proud; but He will establish the border of the widow.
The thoughts of wickedness are an abomination to the LORD; but words of pleasantness are pure.
He that is greedy of gain troubleth his own house; but he that hateth gifts shall live.
The heart of the righteous studieth to answer; but the mouth of the wicked poureth out evil things.
The LORD is far from the wicked; but He heareth the prayer of the righteous.
The light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart; and a good report maketh the bones fat.
The ear that hearkeneth to the reproof of life abideth among the wise.
He that refuseth correction despiseth his own soul; but he that hearkeneth to reproof getteth understanding.
The fear of the LORD is the instruction of wisdom; and before honour goeth humility.
The preparations of the heart are man's, but the answer of the tongue is from the LORD.
All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes; but the LORD weigheth the spirits.
Commit thy works unto the LORD, and thy thoughts shall be established.
The LORD hath made every things for His own purpose, yea, even the wicked for the day of evil.
Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the LORD; my hand upon it! he shall not be unpunished.
By mercy and truth iniquity is expiated; and by the fear of the LORD men depart from evil.
When a man's ways please the LORD, He maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him.
Better is a little with righteousness than great revenues with injustice.
A man's heart deviseth his way; but the LORD directeth his steps.
A divine sentence is in the lips of the king; his mouth trespasseth not in judgment.
A just balance and scales are the LORD'S; all the weights of the bag are His work.
It is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness; for the throne is established by righteousness.
Righteous lips are the delight of kings; and they love him that speaketh right.
The wrath of a king is as messengers of death; but a wise man will pacify it.
In the light of the king's countenance is life; and his favour is as a cloud of the latter rain.
How much better is it to get wisdom than gold! yea, to get understanding is rather to be chosen than silver.
The highway of the upright is to depart from evil; he that keepeth his way preserveth his soul.
Pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall.
Better it is to be of a lowly spirit with the humble, than to divide the spoil with the proud.
He that giveth heed unto the word shall find good; and whoso trusteth in the LORD, happy is he.
The wise in heart is called a man of discernment; and the sweetness of the lips increaseth learning.
Understanding is a fountain of life unto him that hath it; but folly is the chastisement of fools.
The heart of the wise teacheth his mouth, and addeth learning to his lips.
Pleasant words are as a honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and health to the bones.
There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death.
The hunger of the labouring man laboureth for him; for his mouth compelleth him.
An ungodly man diggeth up evil, and in his lips there is as a burning fire.
A froward man soweth strife; and a whisperer separateth familiar friends.
A man of violence enticeth his neighbour, and leadeth him into a way that is not good.
He that shutteth his eyes, it is to devise froward things; he that biteth his lips bringeth evil to pass.
The hoary head is a crown of glory, it is found in the way of righteousness.
He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city.
The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the LORD.
Better is a dry morsel and quietness therewith, than a house full of feasting with strife.
A servant that dealeth wisely shall have rule over a son that dealeth shamefully, and shall have part of the inheritance among the brethren.
The refining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold; but the LORD trieth the hearts.
A evil-doer giveth heed to wicked lips; and a liar giveth ear to a mischievous tongue.
Whoso mocketh the poor blasphemeth his Maker; and he that is glad at calamity shall not be unpunished.
Children's children are the crown of old men; and the glory of children are their fathers.
Overbearing speech becometh not a churl; much less do lying lips a prince.
A gift is as a precious stone in the eyes of him that hath it; whithersoever he turneth, he prospereth.
He that covereth a transgression seeketh love; but he that harpeth on a matter estrangeth a familiar friend.
A rebuke entereth deeper into a man of understanding than a hundred stripes into a fool.
A rebellious man seeketh only evil; therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him.
Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather than a fool in his folly.
Whoso rewardeth evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house.
The beginning of strife is as when one letteth out water; therefore leave off contention, before the quarrel break out.
He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the righteous, even they both are an abomination to the LORD.
Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to buy wisdom, seeing he hath no understanding?
A friend loveth at all times, and a brother is born for adversity.
A man void of understanding is he that striketh hands, and becometh surety in the presence of his neighbour.
He loveth transgression that loveth strife; he that exalteth his gate seeketh destruction.
He that hath a froward heart findeth no good; and he that hath a perverse tongue falleth into evil.
He that begetteth a fool doeth it to his sorrow; and the father of a churl hath no joy.
A merry heart is a good medicine; but a broken spirit drieth the bones.
A wicked man taketh a gift out of the bosom, to pervert the ways of justice.
Wisdom is before him that hath understanding; but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth.
A foolish son is vexation to his father, and bitterness to her that bore him.
To punish also the righteous is not good, nor to strike the noble for their uprightness.
He that spareth his words hath knowledge; and he that husbandeth his spirit is a man of discernment.
Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise; and he that shutteth his lips is esteemed as a man of understanding.
He that separateth himself seeketh his own desire, and snarlest against all sound wisdom.
A fool hath no delight in understanding, but only that his heart may lay itself bare.
When the wicked cometh, there cometh also contempt, and with ignominy reproach.
The words of a man's mouth are as deep waters; a flowing brook, a fountain of wisdom.
It is not good to respect the person of the wicked, so as to turn aside the righteous in judgment.
A fool's lips enter into contention, and his mouth calleth for strokes.
A fool's mouth is his ruin, and his lips are the snare of his soul.
The words of a whisperer are as dainty morsels, and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly.
Even one that is slack in his work is brother to him that is a destroyer.
The name of the LORD is a strong tower: the righteous runneth into it, and is set up on high.
The rich man's wealth is his strong city, and as a high wall in his own conceit.
Before destruction the heart of a man is haughty, and before honour goeth humility.
He that giveth answer before he heareth, it is folly and confusion unto him.
The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; but a broken spirit who can bear?
The heart of the prudent getteth knowledge; and the ear of the wise seeketh knowledge.
A man's gift maketh room for him, and bringeth him before great men.
He that pleadeth his cause first seemeth just; but his neighbour cometh and searcheth him out.
The lot causeth strife to cease, and parteth asunder the contentious.
A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong city; and their contentions are like the bars of a castle.
A man's belly shall be filled with the fruit of his mouth; with the increase of his lips shall he be satisfied.
Death and life are in the power of the tongue; and they that indulge it shall eat the fruit thereof.
Whoso findeth a wife findeth a great good, and obtaineth favour of the LORD.
The poor useth entreaties; but the rich answereth impudently.
There are friends that one hath to his own hurt; but there is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother.
Better is the poor that walketh in his integrity than he that is perverse in his lips and a fool at the same time.
Also, that the soul be without knowledge is not good; and he that hasteth with his feet sinneth.
The foolishness of man perverteth his way; and his heart fretteth against the LORD.
Wealth addeth many friends; but as for the poor, his friend separateth himself from him.
A false witness shall not be unpunished; and he that breatheth forth lies shall not escape.
Many will entreat the favour of the liberal man; and every man is a friend to him that giveth gifts.
All the brethren of the poor do hate him; how much more do his friends go far from him! He that pursueth words, they turn against him.
He that getteth wisdom loveth his own soul; he that keepeth understanding shall find good.
A false witness shall not be unpunished; and he that breatheth forth lies shall perish.
Luxury is not seemly for a fool; much less for a servant to have rule over princes.
It is the discretion of a man to be slow to anger, and it is his glory to pass over a transgression.
The king's wrath is as the roaring of a lion; but his favour is as dew upon the grass.
A foolish son is the calamity of his father; and the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping.
House and riches are the inheritance of fathers; but a prudent wife is from the LORD.
Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep; and the idle soul shall suffer hunger.
He that keepeth the commandment keepeth his soul; but he that despiseth His ways shall die.
He that is gracious unto the poor lendeth unto the LORD; and his good deed will He repay unto him.
Chasten thy son, for there is hope; but set not thy heart on his destruction.
A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment; for if thou interpose, thou wilt add thereto.
Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou mayest be wise in thy latter end.
There are many devices in a man's heart; but the counsel of the LORD, that shall stand.
The lust of a man is his shame; and a poor man is better than a liar.
The fear of the LORD tendeth to life; and he that hath it shall abide satisfied, he shall not be visited with evil.
The sluggard burieth his hand in the dish, and will not so much as bring it back to his mouth.
When thou smitest a scorner, the simple will become prudent; and when one that hath understanding is reproved, he will understand knowledge.
A son that dealeth shamefully and reproachfully will despoil his father, and chase away his mother.
Cease, my son, to hear the instruction that causeth to err from the words of knowledge.
An ungodly witness mocketh at right; and the mouth of the wicked devoureth iniquity.
Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of fools.
Wine is a mocker, strong drink is riotous; and whosoever reeleth thereby is not wise.
The terror of a king is as the roaring of a lion: he that provoketh him to anger forfeiteth his life.
It is an honour for a man to keep aloof from strife; but every fool will be snarling.
The sluggard will not plow when winter setteth in; therefore he shall beg in harvest, and have nothing.
Counsel in the heart of man is like deep water; but a man of understanding will draw it out.
Most men will proclaim every one his own goodness; but a faithful man who can find?
He that walketh in his integrity as a just man, happy are his children after him.
A king that sitteth on the throne of judgment scattereth away all evil with his eyes.
Who can say: 'I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin'?
Divers weights, and divers measures, both of them alike are an abomination to the LORD.
Even a child is known by his doings, whether his work be pure, and whether it be right.
The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the LORD hath made even both of them.
Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thine eyes, and thou shalt have bread in plenty.
'It is bad, it is bad', saith the buyer; but when he is gone his way, then he boasteth.
There is gold, and a multitude of rubies; but the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel.
Take his garment that is surety for a stranger; and hold him in pledge that is surety for an alien woman.
Bread of falsehood is sweet to a man; but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel.
Every purpose is established by counsel; and with good advice carry on war.
He that goeth about as a talebearer revealeth secrets; therefore meddle not with him that openeth wide his lips.
Whoso curseth his father or his mother, his lamp shall be put out in the blackest darkness.
An estate may be gotten hastily at the beginning; but the end thereof shall not be blessed.
Say not thou: 'I will requite evil'; wait for the LORD, and He will save thee.
Divers weights are an abomination to the LORD; and a false balance is not good.
A man's goings are of the LORD; how then can man look to his way?
It is a snare to a man rashly to say: 'Holy', and after vows to make inquiry.
A wise king sifteth the wicked, and turneth the wheel over them.
The spirit of man is the lamp of the LORD, searching all the inward parts.
Mercy and truth preserve the king; and his throne is upheld by mercy.
The glory of young men is their strength; and the beauty of old men is the hoary head.
Sharp wounds cleanse away evil; so do stripes that reach the inward parts.
The king's heart is in the hand of the LORD as the watercourses: He turneth it whithersoever He will.
Every way of a man is right in his own eyes; but the LORD weigheth the hearts.
To do righteousness and justice is more acceptable to the LORD than sacrifice.
A haughty look, and a proud heart--the tillage of the wicked is sin.
The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousness; but every one that is hasty hasteth only to want.
The getting of treasures by a lying tongue is a vapour driven to and fro; they [that seek them] seek death.
The violence of the wicked shall drag them away; because they refuse to do justly.
The way of man is froward and strange; but as for the pure, his work is right.
It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than in a house in common with a contentious woman.
The soul of the wicked desireth evil; his neighbour findeth no favour in his eyes.
When the scorner is punished, the thoughtless is made wise; and when the wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge.
The Righteous One considereth the house of the wicked; overthrowing the wicked to their ruin.
Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be answered.
A gift in secret pacifieth anger, and a present in the bosom strong wrath.
To do justly is joy to the righteous, but ruin to the workers of iniquity.
The man that strayeth out of the way of understanding shall rest in the congregation of the shades.
He that loveth pleasure shall be a poor man; he that loveth wine and oil shall not be rich.
The wicked is a ransom for the righteous; and the faithless cometh in the stead of the upright.
It is better to dwell in a desert land, than with a contentious and fretful woman.
There is desirable treasure and oil in the dwelling of the wise; but a foolish man swalloweth it up.
He that followeth after righteousness and mercy findeth life, prosperity, and honour.
A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, and bringeth down the stronghold wherein it trusteth.
Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue keepeth his soul from troubles.
A proud and haughty man, scorner is his name, even he that dealeth in overbearing pride.
The desire of the slothful killeth him; for his hands refuse to labour.
There is that coveteth greedily all the day long; but the righteous giveth and spareth not.
The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination; how much more, when he bringeth it with the proceeds of wickedness?
A false witness shall perish; but the man that obeyeth shall speak unchallenged.
A wicked man hardeneth his face; but as for the upright, he looketh well to his way.
There is no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against the LORD.
The horse is prepared against the day of battle; but victory is of the LORD.
A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving favour rather than silver and gold.
The rich and the poor meet together--the LORD is the maker of them all.
A prudent man seeth the evil, and hideth himself; but the thoughtless pass on, and are punished.
The reward of humility is the fear of the LORD, even riches, and honour, and life.
Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward; he that keepeth his soul holdeth himself far from them.
Train up a child in the way he should go, and even when he is old, he will not depart from it.
The rich ruleth over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the lender.
He that soweth iniquity shall reap vanity; and the rod of his wrath shall fail.
He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed; for he giveth of his bread to the poor.
Cast out the scorner, and contention will go out; yea, strife and shame will cease.
He that loveth pureness of heart, that hath grace in his lips, the king shall be his friend.
The eyes of the LORD preserve him that hath knowledge, but He overthroweth the words of the faithless man.
The sluggard saith: 'There is a lion without; I shall be slain in the streets.'
The mouth of strange women is a deep pit: he that is abhorred of the LORD shall fall therein.
Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child; but the rod of correction shall drive it far from him.
One may oppress the poor, yet will their gain increase; one may give to the rich, yet will want come.
Incline thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply thy heart unto my knowledge.
For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee; let them be established altogether upon thy lips.
That thy trust may be in the LORD, I have made them known to thee this day, even to thee.
Have not I written unto thee excellent things of counsels and knowledge;
That I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth, that thou mightest bring back words of truth to them that send thee?
Rob not the weak, because he is weak, neither crush the poor in the gate;
For the LORD will plead their cause, and despoil of life those that despoil them.
Make no friendship with a man that is given to anger; and with a wrathful man thou shalt not go;
Lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul.
Be thou not of them that strike hands, or of them that are sureties for debts;
If thou hast not wherewith to pay, why should he take away thy bed from under thee?
Remove not the ancient landmark, which thy fathers have set.
Seest thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before kings;
When thou sittest to eat with a ruler, consider well him that is before thee;
And put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite.
Be not desirous of his dainties; seeing they are deceitful food.
Weary not thyself to be rich; cease from thine own wisdom.
Wilt thou set thine eyes upon it? it is gone;
Eat thou not the bread of him that hath an evil eye, neither desire thou his dainties;
For as one that hath reckoned within himself, so is he:
The morsel which thou hast eaten shalt thou vomit up, and lose thy sweet words.
Speak not in the ears of a fool; for he will despise the wisdom of thy words.
Remove not the ancient landmark; and enter not into the fields of the fatherless;
For their Redeemer is strong; He will plead their cause with thee.
Apply thy heart unto instruction, and thine ears to the words of knowledge.
Withhold not correction from the child; for though thou beat him with the rod, he will not die.
Thou beatest him with the rod, and wilt deliver his soul from the nether-world.
My son, if thy heart be wise, my heart will be glad, even mine;
Yea, my reins will rejoice, when thy lips speak right things.
Let not thy heart envy sinners, but be in the fear of the LORD all the day;
For surely there is a future; and thy hope shall not be cut off.
Hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guide thy heart in the way.
Be not among winebibbers; among gluttonous eaters of flesh;
For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty; and drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags.
Hearken unto thy father that begot thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old.
Buy the truth, and sell it not; also wisdom, and instruction, and understanding.
The father of the righteous will greatly rejoice; and he that begetteth a wise child will have joy of him.
Let thy father and thy mother be glad, and let her that bore thee rejoice.
My son, give me thy heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways.
For a harlot is a deep ditch; and an alien woman is a narrow pit.
She also lieth in wait as a robber, and increaseth the faithless among men.
Who crieth: 'Woe'? who: 'Alas'? who hath contentions? who hath raving? who hath wounds without cause?
They that tarry long at the wine; they that go to try mixed wine.
Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth its colour in the cup, when it glideth down smoothly;
At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like a basilisk.
Thine eyes shall behold strange things, and thy heart shall utter confused things.
Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst of the sea, or as he that lieth upon the top of a mast.
'They have struck me, and I felt it not, they have beaten me, and I knew it not;
Be not thou envious of evil men, neither desire to be with them.
For their heart studieth destruction, and their lips talk of mischief.
Through wisdom is a house builded; and by understanding it is established;
And by knowledge are the chambers filled with all precious and pleasant riches.
A wise man is strong; yea, a man of knowledge increaseth strength.
For with wise advice thou shalt make thy war; and in the multitude of counsellors there is safety.
Wisdom is as unattainable to a fool as corals; he openeth not his mouth in the gate.
He that deviseth to do evil, men shall call him a mischievous person.
The thought of foolishness is sin; and the scorner is an abomination to men.
If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small indeed.
Deliver them that are drawn unto death; and those that are ready to be slain wilt thou forbear to rescue?
If thou sayest: 'Behold, we knew not this', doth not He that weigheth the hearts consider it? And He that keepeth thy soul, doth not He know it? And shall not He render to every man according to his works?
My son, eat thou honey, for it is good, and the honeycomb is sweet to thy taste;
So know thou wisdom to be unto thy soul; if thou hast found it, then shall there be a future, and thy hope shall not be cut off.
Lie not in wait, O wicked man, against the dwelling of the righteous, spoil not his resting-place;
For a righteous man falleth seven times, and riseth up again, but the wicked stumble under adversity.
Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thy heart be glad when he stumbleth;
Lest the LORD see it, and it displease Him, and He turn away His wrath from him.
Fret not thyself because of evildoers, neither be thou envious at the wicked;
For there will be no future to the evil man, the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.
My son, fear thou the LORD and the king, and meddle not with them that are given to change;
For their calamity shall rise suddenly; and who knoweth the ruin from them both?
These also are sayings of the wise. To have respect of persons in judgment is not good.
He that saith unto the wicked: 'Thou art righteous', peoples shall curse him, nations shall execrate him;
But to them that decide justly shall be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them.
He kisseth the lips that giveth a right answer.
Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thyself in the field; and afterwards build thy house.
Be not a witness against thy neighbour without cause; and deceive not with thy lips.
Say not: 'I will do so to him as he hath done to me; I will render to the man according to his work.'
I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding;
And, lo, it was all grown over with thistles, the face thereof was covered with nettles, and the stone wall thereof was broken down.
Then I beheld, and considered well; I saw, and received instruction.
'Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep'--
So shall thy poverty come as a runner, and thy want as an armed man.
These also are proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out.
It is the glory of God to conceal a thing; but the glory of kings is to search out a matter.
The heaven for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of kings is unsearchable.
Take away the dross from the silver, and there cometh forth a vessel for the refiner;
Take away the wicked from before the king, and his throne shall be established in righteousness.
Glorify not thyself in the presence of the king, and stand not in the place of great men;
For better is it that it be said unto thee: 'Come up hither', than that thou shouldest be put lower in the presence of the prince, whom thine eyes have seen.
Go not forth hastily to strive, lest thou know not what to do in the end thereof, when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame.
Debate thy cause with thy neighbour, but reveal not the secret of another;
Lest he that heareth it revile thee, and thine infamy turn not away.
A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in settings of silver.
As an ear-ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprover upon an obedient ear.
As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, so is a faithful messenger to him that sendeth him; for he refresheth the soul of his master.
As vapours and wind without rain, so is he that boasteth himself of a false gift.
By long forbearing is a ruler persuaded, and a soft tongue breaketh the bone.
Hast thou found honey? eat so much as is sufficient for thee, lest thou be filled therewith, and vomit it.
Let thy foot be seldom in thy neighbour's house; lest he be sated with thee, and hate thee.
As a maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow, so is a man that beareth false witness against his neighbour.
Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint.
As one that taketh off a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar upon nitre, so is he that singeth songs to a heavy heart.
If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat, and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink;
For thou wilt heap coals of fire upon his head, and the LORD will reward thee.
The north wind bringeth forth rain, and a backbiting tongue an angry countenance.
It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than in a house in common with a contentious woman.
As cold waters to a faint soul, so is good news from a far country.
As a troubled fountain, and a corrupted spring, so is a righteous man that giveth way before the wicked.
It is not good to eat much honey; so for men to search out their own glory is not glory.
Like a city broken down and without a wall, so is he whose spirit is without restraint.
As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honour is not seemly for a fool.
As the wandering sparrow, as the flying swallow, so the curse that is causeless shall come home.
A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and a rod for the back of fools.
Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto him.
Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own eyes.
He that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool cutteth off his own feet, and drinketh damage.
The legs hang limp from the lame; so is a parable in the mouth of fools.
As a small stone in a heap of stones, so is he that giveth honour to a fool.
As a thorn that cometh into the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable in the mouth of fools.
A master performeth all things; but he that stoppeth a fool is as one that stoppeth a flood.
As a dog that returneth to his vomit, so is a fool that repeateth his folly.
Seest thou a man wise in his own eyes? there is more hope of a fool than of him.
The sluggard saith: 'There is a lion in the way; yea, a lion is in the streets.'
The door is turning upon its hinges, and the sluggard is still upon his bed.
The sluggard burieth his hand in the dish; it wearieth him to bring it back to his mouth.
The sluggard is wiser in his own eyes than seven men that give wise answer.
He that passeth by, and meddleth with strife not his own, is like one that taketh a dog by the ears.
As a madman who casteth firebrands, arrows, and death;
So is the man that deceiveth his neighbour, and saith: 'Am not I in sport?'
Where no wood is, the fire goeth out; and where there is no whisperer, contention ceaseth.
As coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire; so is a contentious man to kindle strife.
The words of a whisperer are as dainty morsels, and they go down into the innermost parts of the body.
Burning lips and a wicked heart are like an earthen vessel overlaid with silver dross.
He that hateth dissembleth with his lips, but he layeth up deceit within him.
When he speaketh fair, believe him not; for there are seven abominations in his heart.
Though his hatred be concealed with deceit, his wickedness shall be revealed before the congregation.
Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein; and he that rolleth a stone, it shall return upon him.
A lying tongue hateth those that are crushed by it; and a flattering mouth worketh ruin.
Boast not thyself of to-morrow; for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth.
Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger, and not thine own lips.
A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty; but a fool's vexation is heavier than they both.
Wrath is cruel, and anger is overwhelming; but who is able to stand before jealousy?
Better is open rebuke than love that is hidden.
Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy are importunate.
The full soul loatheth a honeycomb; but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.
As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so is a man that wandereth from his place.
Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart; so doth the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel.
Thine own friend, and thy father's friend, forsake not; neither go into thy brother's house in the day of thy calamity;
My son, be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him that taunteth me.
A prudent man seeth the evil, and hideth himself; but the thoughtless pass on, and are punished.
Take his garment that is surety for a stranger; and hold him in pledge that is surety for an alien woman.
He that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be counted a curse to him.
A continual dropping in a very rainy day and a contentious woman are alike;
He that would hide her hideth the wind, and the ointment of his right hand betrayeth itself.
Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.
Whoso keepeth the fig-tree shall eat the fruit thereof; and he that waiteth on his master shall be honoured.
As in water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man.
The nether-world and Destruction are never satiated; so the eyes of man are never satiated.
The refining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold, and a man is tried by his praise.
Though thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar with a pestle among groats,
Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and look well to thy herds;
For riches are not for ever; and doth the crown endure unto all generations?
When the hay is mown, and the tender grass showeth itself, and the herbs of the mountains are gathered in;
The lambs will be for thy clothing, and the goats the price for a field.
And there will be goats' milk enough for thy food, for the food of thy household; and maintenance for thy maidens.
The wicked flee when no man pursueth; but the righteous are secure as a young lion.
For the transgression of a land many are the princes thereof; but by a man of understanding and knowledge established order shall long continue.
A poor man that oppresseth the weak is like a sweeping rain which leaveth no food.
They that forsake the law praise the wicked; but such as keep the law contend with them.
Evil men understand not justice; but they that seek the LORD understand all things.
Better is the poor that walketh in his integrity, than he that is perverse in his ways, though he be rich.
A wise son observeth the teaching; but he that is a companion of gluttonous men shameth his father.
He that augmenteth his substance by interest and increase, gathereth it for him that is gracious to the poor.
He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer is an abomination.
Whoso causeth the upright to go astray in an evil way, he shall fall himself into his own pit; but the whole-hearted shall inherit good.
The rich man is wise in his own eyes; but the poor that hath understanding searcheth him through.
When the righteous exult, there is great glory; but when the wicked rise, men must be sought for.
He that covereth his transgressions shall not prosper; but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall obtain mercy.
Happy is the man that feareth alway; but he that hardeneth his heart shall fall into evil.
As a roaring lion, and a ravenous bear; so is a wicked ruler over a poor people.
The prince that lacketh understanding is also a great oppressor; but he that hateth covetousness shall prolong his days.
A man that is laden with the blood of any person shall hasten his steps unto the pit; none will support him.
Whoso walketh uprightly shall be saved; but he that is perverse in his ways shall fall at once.
He that tilleth his ground shall have plenty of bread; but he that followeth after vain things shall have poverty enough.
A faithful man shall abound with blessings; but he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be unpunished.
To have respect of persons is not good; for a man will transgress for a piece of bread.
He that hath an evil eye hasteneth after riches, and knoweth not that want shall come upon him.
He that rebuketh a man shall in the end find more favour than he that flattereth with the tongue.
Whoso robbeth his father or his mother, and saith: 'It is no transgression', the same is the companion of a destroyer.
He that is of a greedy spirit stirreth up strife; but he that putteth his trust in the LORD shall be abundantly gratified.
He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool; but whoso walketh wisely, he shall escape.
He that giveth unto the poor shall not lack; but he that hideth his eyes shall have many a curse.
When the wicked rise, men hide themselves; but when they perish, the righteous increase.
He that being often reproved hardeneth his neck shall suddenly be broken, and that without remedy.
When the righteous are increased, the people rejoice; but when the wicked beareth rule, the people sigh.
Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father; but he that keepeth company with harlots wasteth his substance.
The king by justice establisheth the land; but he that exacteth gifts overthroweth it.
A man that flattereth his neighbour spreadeth a net for his steps.
In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare; but the righteous doth sing and rejoice.
The righteous taketh knowledge of the cause of the poor; the wicked understandeth not knowledge.
Scornful men set a city in a blaze; but wise men turn away wrath.
If a wise man contendeth with a foolish man, whether he be angry or laugh, there will be no rest.
The men of blood hate him that is sincere; and as for the upright, they seek his life.
A fool spendeth all his spirit; but a wise man stilleth it within him.
If a ruler hearkeneth to falsehood, all his servants are wicked.
The poor man and the oppressor meet together; the LORD giveth light to the eyes of them both.
The king that faithfully judgeth the poor, his throne shall be established for ever.
The rod and reproof give wisdom; but a child left to himself causeth shame to his mother.
When the wicked are increased, transgression increaseth; but the righteous shall gaze upon their fall.
Correct thy son, and he will give thee rest; yea, he will give delight unto thy soul.
Where there is no vision, the people cast off restraint; but he that keepeth the law, happy is he.
A servant will not be corrected by words; for though he understand, there will be no response.
Seest thou a man that is hasty in his words? there is more hope for a fool than for him.
He that delicately bringeth up his servant from a child shall have him become master at the last.
An angry man stirreth up strife, and a wrathful man aboundeth in transgression.
A man's pride shall bring him low; but he that is of a lowly spirit shall attain to honour.
Whoso is partner with a thief hateth his own soul: he heareth the adjuration and uttereth nothing.
The fear of man bringeth a snare; but whoso putteth his trust in the LORD shall be set up on high.
Many seek the ruler's favour; but a man's judgment cometh from the LORD.
An unjust man is an abomination to the righteous; and he that is upright in the way is an abomination to the wicked.
The words of Agur the son of Jakeh; the burden. The man saith unto Ithiel, unto Ithiel and Ucal:
Surely I am brutish, unlike a man, and have not the understanding of a man;
And I have not learned wisdom, that I should have the knowledge of the Holy One.
Who hath ascended up into heaven, and descended?
Every word of God is tried; He is a shield unto them that take refuge in Him.
Add thou not unto His words, lest He reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.
Two things have I asked of Thee; deny me them not before I die:
Remove far from me falsehood and lies; give me neither poverty nor riches;
Lest I be full, and deny, and say: 'Who is the LORD?'
Slander not a servant unto his master, lest he curse thee, and thou be found guilty.
There is a generation that curse their father, and do not bless their mother.
There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their filthiness.
There is a generation, Oh how lofty are their eyes! and their eyelids are lifted up.
There is a generation whose teeth are as swords, and their great teeth as knives,
The horseleech hath two daughters: 'Give, give.'
The grave; and the barren womb; the earth that is not satisfied with water; and the fire that saith not: 'Enough.'
The eye that mocketh at his father, and despiseth to obey his mother,
There are three things which are too wonderful for me, yea, four which I know not:
The way of an eagle in the air; the way of a serpent upon a rock;
So is the way of an adulterous woman;
For three things the earth doth quake, and for four it cannot endure:
For a servant when he reigneth; and a churl when he is filled with food;
For an odious woman when she is married; and a handmaid that is heir to her mistress.
There are four things which are little upon the earth, but they are exceeding wise:
The ants are a people not strong, yet they provide their food in the summer;
The rock-badgers are but a feeble folk, yet make they their houses in the crags;
The locusts have no king, yet go they forth all of them by bands;
The spider thou canst take with the hands, yet is she in kings' palaces.
There are three things which are stately in their march, yea, four which are stately in going:
The lion, which is mightiest among beasts, and turneth not away for any;
The greyhound; the he-goat also; and the king, against whom there is no rising up.
If thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thyself, or if thou hast planned devices, lay thy hand upon thy mouth.
For the churning of milk bringeth forth curd, and the wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood;
The words of king Lemuel; the burden wherewith his mother corrected him.
What, my son? and what, O son of my womb? and what, O son of my vows?
Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that which destroyeth kings.
It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine: nor for princes to say: 'Where is strong drink?'
Lest they drink, and forget that which is decreed, and pervert the justice due to any that is afflicted.
Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto the bitter in soul;
Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more.
Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all such as are appointed to destruction.
Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of the poor and needy.
A woman of valour who can find? for her price is far above rubies.
The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, and he hath no lack of gain.
She doeth him good and not evil all the days of her life.
She seeketh wool and flax, and worketh willingly with her hands.
She is like the merchant-ships; she bringeth her food from afar.
She riseth also while it is yet night, and giveth food to her household, and a portion to her maidens.
She considereth a field, and buyeth it; with the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard.
She girdeth her loins with strength, and maketh strong her arms.
She perceiveth that her merchandise is good; her lamp goeth not out by night.
She layeth her hands to the distaff, and her hands hold the spindle.
She stretcheth out her hand to the poor; yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy.
She is not afraid of the snow for her household; for all her household are clothed with scarlet.
She maketh for herself coverlets; her clothing is fine linen and purple.
Her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the elders of the land.
She maketh linen garments and selleth them; and delivereth girdles unto the merchant.
Strength and dignity are her clothing; and she laugheth at the time to come.
She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and the law of kindness is on her tongue.
She looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness.
Her children rise up, and call her blessed; her husband also, and he praiseth her:
'Many daughters have done valiantly, but thou excellest them all.'
Grace is deceitful, and beauty is vain; but a woman that feareth the LORD, she shall be praised.
Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her works praise her in the gates.